fix typo (#2547)
huggingface/blog: bamba.md

---
title: "Bamba: Latest Inference Efficient Hybrid Mamba2 Model"
thumbnail: assets/bamba/bamba_thumbnail.jpeg
authors:

> - user: Linsong-C

Author: resolved it via a commit

- user: divykum
- user: tridao
- user: albertgu
- user: rganti
- user: mudhakar
- user: daviswer
- user: mirinflim
- user: aviros
- user: tmhoangt
- user: OfirArviv
- user: per
- user: michalshmu
- user: HaochenShen
- user: gabegoodhart
- user: Naigang
- user: nickhugs
- user: JRosenkranz
- user: cliuawesome
- user: adhoq26
- user: 
---

# Bamba: Inference Efficient Hybrid Mamba2 Model :snake:

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/bamba/bamba.jpeg" alt="Bamba" width="400" height="400">
</p>

## TL;DR

We introduce **Bamba-9B**, an inference-efficient Hybrid Mamba2 model trained by IBM, Princeton, CMU, and UIUC on **completely open data**. At inference time, the model demonstrates 2.5x throughput improvement and 2x latency compared to standard transformers in vLLM. To foster community experimentation, we enabled the model in `transformers`, `vLLM`, `TRL`, and `llama.cpp`. We also release tuning, training, and extended pretraining recipes with a stateful data loader and invite the community to further improve this model and tackle the KV-cache bottleneck!

## Artifacts :package:

> 1. [Hugging Face Bamba collection](https://huggingface.co/collections/ibm-fms/bamba-674f1388b9bbc98b413c7bab) 

Author: yes and they are not public yet, we are updating the model cards.

2. [GitHub repo with inference, training, and tuning scripts](https://github.com/foundation-model-stack/bamba)   
3. [Dataloader](https://github.com/foundation-model-stack/fms-fsdp/blob/main/fms_fsdp/utils/dataset_utils.py)  
4. [Quantization](https://github.com/foundation-model-stack/fms-model-optimizer)  
5. [Auto-pilot for cluster monitoring](https://github.com/IBM/autopilot)

## What motivated us :star2:

> Transformer models are increasingly used in real-world applications but face GPU memory bandwidth bottlenecks during inference, particularly in per-token decoding, which worsens with longer context length models. Techniques like lower precision, layer pruning, and compression can alleviate the problem, but do not address the root cause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transformer models are increasingly used in real-world applications, but they face GPU memory bandwidth bottlenecks during inference, particularly during per-token decoding, and aggravated in longer context length models. Techniques like lower precision, layer pruning, and compression can alleviate the problem, but do not address the root cause, which is the increasing amount of memory required by the KV-cache as generated sequences get longer. [KV-Cache](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/kv_cache#best-practices-for-generation-with-cache) is the standard optimization method for autoregressive transformer models.
```

> Emerging architectures such as [Mamba](https://huggingface.co/papers/2312.00752), [Griffin](https://huggingface.co/papers/2402.19427), and [DeltaNet](https://huggingface.co/papers/2406.06484) eliminate this bottleneck by making KV-cache constant. Mamba architecture has gained significant traction in the recent past. For example, [Jamba](https://huggingface.co/papers/2403.19887) and [Samba](https://huggingface.co/papers/2406.07522) interleave Mamba layers with transformer layers. Pure Mamba2 models like [Codestral Mamba](https://mistral.ai/news/codestral-mamba/) demonstrate state-of-the-art (SOTA) results on coding tasks, while NVIDIA’s Mamba2 hybrid achieves competitive performance across long-context and traditional LLM benchmarks. Recent innovations, like [Falcon Mamba](https://huggingface.co/collections/tiiuae/falconmamba-7b-66b9a580324dd1598b0f6d4a), achieve SOTA rankings on [Hugging Face leaderboards](https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/open_llm_leaderboard).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Emerging architectures such as [Mamba](https://huggingface.co/papers/2312.00752), [Griffin](https://huggingface.co/papers/2402.19427), and [DeltaNet](https://huggingface.co/papers/2406.06484) eliminate this bottleneck by making the KV-cache size constant. The Mamba architecture has gained significant traction in the recent past. For example, [Jamba](https://huggingface.co/papers/2403.19887) and [Samba](https://huggingface.co/papers/2406.07522) interleave Mamba layers with transformer layers. Pure Mamba2 models like [Codestral Mamba](https://mistral.ai/news/codestral-mamba/) demonstrate state-of-the-art (SOTA) results on coding tasks, while NVIDIA’s Mamba2 hybrid achieves competitive performance across long-context and traditional LLM benchmarks. Recent innovations, like [Falcon Mamba](https://huggingface.co/collections/tiiuae/falconmamba-7b-66b9a580324dd1598b0f6d4a), achieve SOTA rankings on [Hugging Face leaderboards](https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/open_llm_leaderboard).
```

(Falcon Mamba update released today: https://huggingface.co/blog/falcon3)

Author: 🤣 on the latest.. should we add a note that we will look at the updated model?

Reviewer: Your call, it may be fun to acknowledge the dangers of living in the edge 😅

> We introduce Bamba-9B, a Mamba2 hybrid model, further validating these emerging architectures. This collaboration between IBM, Princeton, CMU, and UIUC provides full training lineage, model checkpoints, and pretraining code to support reproducibility and experimentation. The released checkpoints exclude benchmark-aligned instruction data (except FLAN) to preserve fine-tuning flexibility. Our aim is to showcase the Mamba2 hybrid architecture’s potential.

Reviewer: ❤️

> To foster community experimentation, we are also releasing a distributed stateless shuffle dataloader and enabling Mamba2 hybrid architecture in open-source libraries like `transformers`, `TRL`, `vLLM`, and `llama.cpp`. We hope these efforts advance the adoption of Mamba architectures, alleviate KV-cache bottlenecks, and close the gap with SOTA open-source models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To foster community experimentation, we are also releasing a distributed stateless shuffle dataloader, and enabling the Mamba2 hybrid architecture in open-source libraries like `transformers`, `TRL`, `vLLM`, and `llama.cpp`. We hope these efforts advance the adoption of Mamba architectures, alleviate KV-cache bottlenecks, and close the gap with SOTA open-source models.
```

(At this point while reading the post there have been two intriguing mentions of the dataloader, whose utility is not immediately clear to me. Works well if that's the intent, will revisit later in case some context is helpful).

### Use in transformers 🤗

> Follow instructions outlined in [Bamba GitHub](https://github.com/foundation-model-stack/bamba/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use Bamba with transformers, you can use the familiar `AutoModel` classes and the `generate` API. For more details, please follow the instructions outlined in [Bamba GitHub](https://github.com/foundation-model-stack/bamba/).
```

I assume we also have to tell users to install from `main`.

Author: yeah, which is why I figured cover it in the github.

### TL;DR Evals
Bamba-9B demonstrates the competitive performance of hybrid Mamba models compared to transformer models. While it has gaps in math benchmarks and MMLU scores, excluding these benchmarks places its average performance nearly on par with Meta Llama 3.1 8B (48.01 vs. 48.22). These gaps can be addressed by (a) extending pretraining with more tokens (MMLU scores steadily improved during training), and (b) incorporating high-quality math data in the pretraining/annealing phases. Future plans include using updated datasets like Olmo2 mix and annealing with benchmark-aligned mixes such as Dolmino mix.

Bamba-9B’s results also alleviate concerns raised by the relatively low scores of NVIDIA’s Mamba2 Hybrid model in leaderboard benchmarks. Notably, NVIDIA’s study used an older data mix to compare architectures under identical conditions. Consistent with those findings, Bamba-9B reaffirms that the Mamba2 hybrid architecture offers competitive performance along with up to 5x inference efficiency.

### Comparison with SoTA transformer models

> We compare Bamba and Falcon Mamba with SoTA transformer models of similar size ([Meta Llama 3.1 8B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B), [IBM Granite v3 8B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-3.0-8b-base), [Olmo2 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B), and [Gemma 2 9B](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b)). We observe that while there are obvious benchmark gaps, it is not clear that these gaps point to deficiencies in the mamba/mamba2 based models. In fact, a careful analysis shows that gaps are largely due to the amount of data used for training models and the inclusion of benchmark-aligned instruction datasets during the annealing phase. For example, we had one small scale run that added `metamath` and improved our `GSM8k` score from `36.77` to `60.0`. We will publish detailed analysis and our findings in an upcoming paper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We compare Bamba and Falcon Mamba with SoTA transformer models of similar size ([Meta Llama 3.1 8B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B), [IBM Granite v3 8B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-3.0-8b-base), [Olmo2 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B), and [Gemma 2 9B](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b)). We observe that while there are obvious benchmark gaps, it is not clear that these gaps point to deficiencies in the mamba/mamba2 architectures. In fact, a careful analysis shows that gaps are largely due to the amount of data used for training models and the inclusion of benchmark-aligned instruction datasets during the annealing phase. For example, we had one small scale run that added `metamath` and improved our `GSM8k` score from `36.77` to `60.0`. We will publish detailed analysis and our findings in an upcoming paper.
```

> We compare Bamba and Falcon Mamba with SoTA transformer models of similar size ([Meta Llama 3.1 8B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B), [IBM Granite v3 8B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-3.0-8b-base), [Olmo2 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B), and [Gemma 2 9B](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b)). We observe that while there are obvious benchmark gaps, it is not clear that these gaps point to deficiencies in the mamba/mamba2 based models. In fact, a careful analysis shows that gaps are largely due to the amount of data used for training models and the inclusion of benchmark-aligned instruction datasets during the annealing phase. For example, we had one small scale run that added `metamath` and improved our `GSM8k` score from `36.77` to `60.0`. We will publish detailed analysis and our findings in an upcoming paper.

Reviewer: Should one of the images be displayed here?

<details>
<summary>HF OpenLLM v1 leaderboard</summary>

> [HF LLM- V1](https://huggingface.co/docs/leaderboards/en/open_llm_leaderboard/archive) \+ OpenbookQA and PIQA :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[HF LLM-V1](https://huggingface.co/docs/leaderboards/en/open_llm_leaderboard/archive) \+ OpenbookQA and PIQA:
```

| Model | Average | MMLU | ARC-C | GSM8K | Hellaswag | OpenbookQA | Piqa | TruthfulQA | Winogrande |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| [Bamba 9B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-fms/Bamba-9B) | 62.31 | 60.77 | 63.23 | 36.77 | 81.8 | 47.6 | 82.26 | 49.21 | 76.87 |
| [Falcon Mamba 7B](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-mamba-7b) | 65.31 | 63.19 | 63.4 | 52.08 | 80.82 | 47.8 | 83.62 | 53.46 | 78.14 |
| [Meta Llama 3.1 8B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B) | 63.51 | 66.26 | 57.85 | 49.96 | 81.98 | 46.8 | 82.54 | 45.16 | 77.51 |
| [IBM Granite v3 8B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-3.0-8b-base) | 67.47 | 65.45 | 63.74 | 62.55 | 83.29 | 47.6 | 83.41 | 52.89 | 80.82 |
| [Olmo2 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B) | 66.17 | 63.96 | 64.51 | 68.01 | 81.93 | 49.2 | 81.39 | 43.32 | 77.03 |
| [Gemma2 9B](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b) | 68.38 | 72.29 | 68.26 | 67.4 | 82.56 | 47.8 | 83.24 | 45.39 | 80.11 |
| [Qwen2.5 7B](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B) | 70.58 | 75.41 | 63.82 | 83.24 | 80.23 | 48.40 | 81.28 | 56.34 | 75.93 |
</details>

> [HF LLM- V2](https://huggingface.co/docs/leaderboards/open_llm_leaderboard/about)\*\* :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[HF LLM-V2](https://huggingface.co/docs/leaderboards/open_llm_leaderboard/about)\*\* :
```

| Model | Average | MMLU-PRO | BBH | GPQA | IFEval | MATH Lvl 5 | MuSR |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| [Bamba 9B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-fms/Bamba-9B) | 10.91 | 17.53 | 17.4 | 4.14 | 15.16 | 1.66 | 9.59 |
| [Falcon Mamba 7B](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-mamba-7b) | 14.70 | 14.33 | 19.88 | 8.17 | 31.93 | 4.0 | 9.88 |
| [Meta Llama 3.1 8B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B) | 14.27 | 25.46 | 25.16 | 8.61 | 12.55 | 5.14 | 8.72 |
| [IBM Granite v3 8B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-3.0-8b-base) | 21.14 | 25.83 | 28.02 | 9.06 | 44.79 | 9.82 | 9.32 |
| [Olmo2 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B) | 13.36 | 22.79 | 21.69 | 4.92 | 16.35 | 4.38 | 10.02 |
| [Gemma2 9B](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b) | 21.79 | 34.84 | 34.81 | 11.07 | 21.28 | 13.44 | 15.3 |
| [Qwen2.5 7B](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B) | 20.6 | 37.62 | 35.62 | 9.96 | 34.77 | 18.35 | 14.6 |

### Safety tasks

> Safety benchmarks are crucial for ensuring AI models generate content that is ethical, inclusive, and non-harmful. We evaluate our model on well known safety benchmarks such as Toxigen (5-shot, logits) (focused on detecting toxic language), BBQ (5-shot, generation), PopQA (5-shot, generation), and CrowS-Pairs (which measures bias and fairness). We intend to fix the gaps in safety through comprehensive SFT and DPO approaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Safety benchmarks are crucial for ensuring AI models generate content that is ethical, inclusive, and non-harmful. We evaluate our model on well-known safety benchmarks such as Toxigen (5-shot, logits) (focused on detecting toxic language), BBQ (5-shot, generation), PopQA (5-shot, generation), and CrowS-Pairs (which measures bias and fairness). We intend to fix the gaps in safety through comprehensive SFT and DPO approaches.
```

| Model | PopQA | Toxigen | BBQ  | Crow-SPairs* |

| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| [Bamba 9B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-fms/Bamba-9B) | 20.5 | 57.4 | 44.2 | 70.7 |
| [Olmo2 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B) | 25.7 | 63.1 | 58.4 | 72 |
| [Gemma2 9B](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b) | 27.3 | 69.6 | 59.9 | 71.7 |
| [IBM Granite v3 8B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-3.0-8b-base) | 27.5 | 79.9 | 82.1 | 75 |
| [Meta Llama 3.1 8B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B) | 28.8 | 67 | 60 | 70.8 |
| [Falcon Mamba 7B](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-mamba-7b) | 19.3 | 62.1 | 60.2 | 75 |

> *Lower is better

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Model | PopQA | Toxigen | BBQ  | Crow-SPairs ↓ |

| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| [Bamba 9B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-fms/Bamba-9B) | 20.5 | 57.4 | 44.2 | 70.7 |
| [Olmo2 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B) | 25.7 | 63.1 | 58.4 | 72 |
| [Gemma2 9B](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b) | 27.3 | 69.6 | 59.9 | 71.7 |
| [IBM Granite v3 8B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-3.0-8b-base) | 27.5 | 79.9 | 82.1 | 75 |
| [Meta Llama 3.1 8B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B) | 28.8 | 67 | 60 | 70.8 |
| [Falcon Mamba 7B](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-mamba-7b) | 19.3 | 62.1 | 60.2 | 75 |

```

(replaced the asterisk with an arrow, just in case you prefer it that way)

## Comparison with transformers with similar token budget

> We pick a few prominent models: [Olmo 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-7B) trained on identical data (2024), [Meta Llama 2 7B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b) (2023), and [IBM Granite 7B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-7b-base) (2023), which have been trained to \~2T tokens. While Olmo 7B outperforms Meta Llama 2 and IBM Granite models across these 8 benchmarks, we note that with the same dataset, Bamba outperforms Olmo 7B. Since the Bamba model has 9B parameters, a direct comparison is again difficult, but the main takeaway is that mamba2-based hybrid models are competitive with the transformer models trained on the same dataset with similar token budget.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We chose a few prominent models for comparison: [Olmo 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-7B), [Meta Llama 2 7B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b) (2023), and [IBM Granite 7B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-7b-base) (2023). Crucially, Olmo 7B was trained with identical data as Bamba, while the others were trained for longer, to ~2T tokens. While Olmo 7B outperforms Meta Llama 2 and IBM Granite models across these 8 benchmarks, we note that with the same dataset, Bamba outperforms Olmo 7B. Since the Bamba model has 9B parameters, a direct comparison is difficult, but the main takeaway is that mamba2-based hybrid models are competitive with similar transformer models when trained on the same dataset with a similar token budget.
```

I found the `trained on identical data` mention a bit confusing, so trying to clarify. Please, ignore if my interpretation was not correct.

| Model | Average | MMLU | ARC-C | GSM8K | Hellaswag | OpenbookQA | Piqa | TruthfulQA | Winogrande |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| [Bamba 9B (2.2T)](https://huggingface.co/ibm-fms/Bamba-9B) | 62.31 | 60.77 | 63.23 | 36.77 | 81.8 | 47.6 | 82.26 | 49.21 | 76.87 |
| [Olmo1.5 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-7B-0424-hf) | 55.8 | 53.38 | 50.51 | 27.67 | 79.13 | 45.2 | 81.56 | 35.92 | 73.09 |
| [Bamba 9B (2T)](https://huggingface.co/ibm-fms/Bamba-9B-2T) | 59.11 | 59.05 | 57.25 | 24.03 | 83.66 | 47.6 | 83.62 | 38.26 | 79.4 |
| [Meta Llama2 7B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-hf) | 53.78 | 46.64 | 52.65 | 13.57 | 78.95 | 45.2 | 80.03 | 38.96 | 74.27 |
| [IBM Granite 7B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-7b-base) | 52.07 | 49.02 | 49.91 | 10.84 | 77.0 | 40.8 | 80.14 | 38.7 | 70.17 |

<details>
<summary>Mamba/Mamba2 comparisons</summary>

### Comparison with mamba/mamba2 architecture based language models

> Several mamba/mamba2 architecture based models have started coming up in the last 6 months (e.g., NVIDIA Mamba2 Hybrid, Codestral Mamba, Falcon Mamba, [Zamba 7B v1](https://huggingface.co/Zyphra/Zamba-7B-v1)) furthering the performance of these architectures and demonstrating their superior inference performance as well as closing the gap with quality. We compare 8 key benchmarks across Bamba, NVIDIA Mamba2 Hybrid, Zamba, and Falcon Mamba. Falcon Mamba is a pure mamba model, Zamba has shared attention layer for every 6 mamba layers, and Bamba and NVIDIA are both hybrid models with full attention layers interspersed with mamba2 layer. Falcon Mamba was trained to 5.5T tokens and it performs the best overall but there are open questions on how well it will perform on long-context tasks where mamba-based architectures truly shine in their inference performance. Zamba was trained on fewer tokens (1T), but with a different Hybrid architecture and datasets that had benchmark-aligned instruction datasets including those generated from more powerful language models. Bamba and NVIDIA Mamba2 Hybrid are quite similar to each other (details on differences are summarized in the model architecture section), but Bamba is trained to 2.2T tokens while NVIDIA Hybrid Mamba is trained to 3.5T tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several mamba/mamba2 architecture based models have started coming up in the last 6 months (e.g., NVIDIA Mamba2 Hybrid, Codestral Mamba, Falcon Mamba, [Zamba 7B v1](https://huggingface.co/Zyphra/Zamba-7B-v1)) furthering the performance of these architectures and demonstrating their superior inference performance as well as closing the gap with quality. We compare 8 key benchmarks across Bamba, NVIDIA Mamba2 Hybrid, Zamba, and Falcon Mamba. Falcon Mamba is a pure mamba model, Zamba has shared attention layer for every 6 mamba layers, and Bamba and NVIDIA are both hybrid models with full attention layers interspersed with mamba2 layer. Falcon Mamba was trained to 5.5T tokens and it performs the best overall, but there are open questions on how well it will perform on long-context tasks where mamba-based architectures truly shine in their inference performance. Zamba was trained on fewer tokens (1T), but with a different Hybrid architecture and datasets that had benchmark-aligned instruction datasets including those generated from more powerful language models. Bamba and NVIDIA Mamba2 Hybrid are quite similar to each other (details on differences are summarized in the model architecture section), but Bamba is trained to 2.2T tokens while NVIDIA Hybrid Mamba is trained to 3.5T tokens.
```

> **💡 Note:** The differences in training datasets and the number of tokens seen during training make a direct comparison of these models difficult. The key takeaway from this table is that mamba2 hybrid architecture can deliver competitive results while being nearly as efficient to train as transformer models. Furthermore, they can deliver significant improvement (theoretically up to 5x) in inference efficiency despite having full attention layers interspersed with mamba2 layers. We are continuing to pretrain the Bamba model with the latest datasets and plan to release future checkpoints as the model gets better.

</details>

## Inference efficiency :zap: :racing_car: 

The KV-cache bottleneck is a major challenge for large language models, prompting solutions like quantization, pruning, and novel architectures such as Mamba2, Linear Transformers, and RetNets. Realizing inference gains at scale, even with standard transformers, often requires custom kernels. Mamba2 builds on the community momentum of kernel availability, with further improvements made through integration with the vLLM model-serving framework.

> Our progress in vLLM integration, tracked via [this PR](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/pull/10909), benchmarks Mamba2 against Meta Llama 3.1 8B on an NVIDIA H100 80GB GPU. Using input sizes of 1K tokens and output sizes ranging from 2K to 64K across various batch sizes, we measured throughput (tokens/second) and latency. Results show that as batch size and sequence length increase, Mamba2 achieves up to 2-2.5x better throughput and latency compared to transformers. These gains enhance real-time applications and GPU utilization, with higher throughput ratios (>1) and lower latency ratios (<1) being beneficial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our progress in vLLM integration, tracked via [this PR](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/pull/10909), benchmarks Mamba2 against Meta Llama 3.1 8B on an NVIDIA H100 80GB GPU. Using input sizes of 1K tokens and output sizes ranging from 2K to 64K across various batch sizes, we measured throughput (tokens/second) and latency. Results show that as batch size and sequence length increase, Mamba2 achieves up to 2-2.5x better throughput and latency compared to pure transformer implementations. These gains enhance real-time applications and GPU utilization, with higher throughput ratios (>1) and lower latency ratios (<1) being beneficial.
```

(tangentially related, just for info: https://www.reddit.com/r/LocalLLaMA/comments/1hayqkt/hugging_face_releases_text_generation_inference/)

## Model architecture

We base our model architecture on the NVIDIA Hybrid Mamba2 with the following changes. 

| Parameter | Bamba 9B | NVIDIA Mamba2 Hybrid 8B | 
|---------|-------|-------| 
| Num layers | 32 | 29 | 
| Num attention layers | 3 | 4 | 
| Num Mamba2 layers | 29 | 25 | 
| MLP expansion factor | 3.5 | 4 | 
| Vocab size | 128k | 256k | 
| Non-embedding parameters | 8.8B | 8.6B |
 | RoPE | yes | no | 
 | Gated linear units | yes | no |

We have a total of 8B parameters in the Mamba2 layers, 800M in full attention layers, and 1B in embeddings. The hidden state is 4K, GQA for full attention with 8 KV-heads and 32 heads, Mamba2 layer head dimension is 64, and convolution filter size is 4\. It can be argued that the most significant change between the two models is reducing the full attention layers from 4 in the NVIDIA Mamba2 Hybrid model to 3 in Bamba-9B and introduction of the RoPE embeddings.

## Data

> Open-source data has come a long way since the inception of Pile. When we started training this model, the best open-source data was Dolma v1.7 which was shown to be quite performant through [Olmo models](https://allenai.org/olmo) and [ablations](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceFW/blogpost-fineweb-v1) by the Hugging Face data team. Since then, several other higher quality open source datasets have been released such as [DCLM](https://www.datacomp.ai/dclm/), [FineWeb-2](https://huggingface.co/collections/HuggingFaceFW/fineweb2-6755657a481dae41e8fbba4d), and [Olmo2 mix](https://huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/olmo-mix-1124).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open-source data has come a long way since the inception of The Pile dataset. When we started training this model, the best open-source data was Dolma v1.7, which was shown to be quite performant through the [Olmo models](https://allenai.org/olmo) and [ablations](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceFW/blogpost-fineweb-v1) by the Hugging Face data team. Since then, several other higher quality open source datasets have been released, such as [DCLM](https://www.datacomp.ai/dclm/), [FineWeb-2](https://huggingface.co/collections/HuggingFaceFW/fineweb2-6755657a481dae41e8fbba4d), and [Olmo2 mix](https://huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/olmo-mix-1124).
```

> We use Dolma v1.7 for the first phase of training and the data mixes chosen are illustrated below. For the second phase of training, we use [Fineweb-edu](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceFW/fineweb-edu) and [Cosmopedia](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceTB/cosmopedia) datasets. These datasets are downloaded in their raw form and we tokenize them using the [Ray framework](https://github.com/ray-project/ray) running on an internal large scale [Red Hat Open Shift](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/cloud-computing/openshift) cluster. We plan to release the tokenized and formatted parquet data soon for reproducibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use Dolma v1.7 for the first phase of training, and the chosen data mixes are illustrated below. For the second phase of training, we use [Fineweb-edu](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceFW/fineweb-edu) and [Cosmopedia](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceTB/cosmopedia). These datasets are downloaded in their raw form and we tokenize them using the [Ray framework](https://github.com/ray-project/ray) running on an internal large scale [Red Hat Open Shift](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/cloud-computing/openshift) cluster. We plan to release the tokenized and formatted parquet data soon for reproducibility.
```

<p align="center">
<img src="assets/bamba/datamix.png" alt="Datamix" width="600" height="400">
</p>
<p align="center"><strong>Data mix for pretraining phase one</strong></p>

**Data mix for pretraining phase one**

## Pre-Training

Pre-training Bamba was done in a phased manner, we performed ablation experiments at 1.8B model size and a few 100B tokens to determine the right learning rates and built on the previous community efforts. Based on the promising results from this study, we scaled the model to 3B and 2T tokens using Dolma mix. We also trained a 3B transformer model following Meta Llama architecture with the same data mix and observed similar or better performance from the Bamba model reaching a conclusion similar to the NVIDIA study performed concurrently. Finally, we scaled the model to 9B size and leveraged PyTorch FSDP to train the model.

> We used a cosine learning rate schedule, with a peak learning rate of `3e−4`, a quadratic warmup over 2000 steps, decay factor of 0.033, and an ending learning rate of `1e−5` over 2T tokens. We use the AdamW optimizer with `β1` of 0.9 and `β2` of 0.95. We use a weight decay of 0.1, sequence length of 4096, and a global batch size of 1.5M tokens/batch. We used 192 A100 GPUs from the [IBM Cloud Vela](https://research.ibm.com/blog/AI-supercomputer-Vela-GPU-cluster) production cluster to train this model over a period of 2 months. This cluster runs on Red Hat Open Shift platform and is built on IBM's full stack (e.g., PyTorch, vLLM). We experienced 3 job interruptions, which were attributed to incorrect deployment of jobs and hardware failures. The hardware related job failures were detected automatically using [autopilot](https://github.com/IBM/autopilot).

Reviewer: These details are very interesting for reproducibility, but perhaps they could live in a technical report (when it comes out), or be optionally disclosed.

Author: made the whole two paras into a twistie with training details

We also performed a second phase training with high quality data from Hugging Face FineWeb-edu and Cosmopedia for an additional 200B tokens. We use a learning rate of 2e−5 and a cosine schedule to anneal the model, which helps improve our scores. We are currently experimenting with additional high quality data and will release any future checkpoints as part of our commitment to open source.

## Data loader

> There are several aspects to train a high quality language model, one of them being a data loader. We have been working over the past 18 months on creating a dataloader that satisfies the demands of a large scale distributed training and trading that off with model quality. We open source this data loader to enable others to use it in conjunction with their framework of choice, we have used it in the Bamba model training as well as integrated with Torch Titan. To date, we believe this is the only open source dataloader that provides a rich set of features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several aspects to training a high-quality language model, and we found the data loader to be an important one. Over the past 18 months we have been working on a dataloader that satisfies the demands of large scale distributed training, and trading them off with model quality. We open source this data loader to enable others to use it in conjunction with their framework of choice. We have used it in the Bamba model training, and we have also integrated it with Torch Titan. To date, we believe this is the only open source dataloader that provides a rich set of features.
```

(not fully understanding the trade off comment)

Author: trade off will take a longer blog to explain, so let me remove that comment and keep it lighter. Data loader is currently being integrated into core PyTorch, we have been through multiple rounds of feedback on it.

We use PhoneBook retrieval as the task to measure our performance. We extend the Bamba context length by 4x and 8x and compare the context-extended Bamba against three variations of Meta Llama \- LLama2, Llama3, LLama3.1, with training context lengths of 4K, 8K, and 128K. The results are plotted below.

<p align="center">
<img src="assets/bamba/phonebook.png" alt="Datamix" width="450" height="300">
</p>

We observe that the context-extended Bamba model performs exceptionally well up to a 16K context length without any tuning, outperforming the original Bamba 9B model, Llama2-7B, and llama3-8B by a large margin and obtaining comparable performance as Llama3.1-8B. At sequence length 32K, LLama3.1 achieves the best performing result. However, note that LLama3.1-8B was trained with 128K context length, which incurs a much higher pre-training cost than Bamba. As a next step, we plan to pursue various other approaches to context length extensions and study the performance on more tasks. These long context length extended models will be released as well.

## Summary :dart: 

> Bamba-9B is a 9-billion parameter hybrid Mamba2 model developed collaboratively by IBM, Princeton, CMU, and UIUC. Trained entirely on open datasets, it achieves significant inference efficiency, demonstrating a 2.5x increase in throughput and a 2x reduction in latency compared to standard transformers when benchmarked in the vLLM framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bamba-9B is a 9-billion parameter hybrid Mamba2 model developed collaboratively by IBM, Princeton, CMU, and UIUC. Trained entirely on open datasets, it achieves significant inference efficiency, demonstrating a 2.5x increase in throughput and a 2x reduction in latency compared to standard transformer models when benchmarked in the vLLM framework.
```

Author: modified

---
title: "Bamba: Inference-Efficient Hybrid Mamba2 Model"

> thumbnail: assets/bamba/bamba_thumbnail.jpeg

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thumbnail: /blog/assets/bamba/bamba_thumbnail.png
```

  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: tridao
  guest: true
  org: state-spaces
- user: albertgu
  guest: true
  org: state-spaces
- user: rganti
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: dakshiagrawal
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: mudhakar
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: daviswer
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: mirinflim
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: aviros
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: nelsonspbr
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: tmhoangt
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: OfirArviv
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: per
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: michalshmu
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: HaochenShen
  guest: true
- user: gabegoodhart
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: Naigang
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: nickhugs
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: JRosenkranz
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: cliuawesome
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: adhoq26
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: cyang49
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: SukritiSharma
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: anhuong
  guest: true
  org: ibm-fms
- user: jaygala
  guest: true
- user: szawad
  guest: true
- user: RTGordon
  guest: true
---

> # Bamba: Inference-Efficient Hybrid Mamba2 Model :snake:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Bamba: Inference-Efficient Hybrid Mamba2 Model 🐍
```

I was not sure about rendering of emojis with the `:snake:` command. I see [here](https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/2112fb174f09da10223c27148cb2d356a679dc73/image-preferences.md?plain=1#L14) we have used the emoji as the ascii character itself.

@pcuenca what do you think?

Reviewer 2: Same comment for the rest of the blog post as well.

Reviewer: Yes, we have to use the characters

<p align="center">
  <img src="/blog/assets/bamba/bamba.jpeg" alt="Bamba" width="400" height="400">
</p>

## TL;DR

We introduce **Bamba-9B**, an inference-efficient Hybrid Mamba2 model trained by IBM, Princeton, CMU, and UIUC on **completely open data**. At inference time, the model demonstrates 2.5x throughput improvement and 2x latency speedup compared to standard transformers in vLLM. To foster community experimentation, the model is immediately available to use in `transformers`, `vLLM`, `TRL`, and `llama.cpp`. We also release tuning, training, and extended pretraining recipes with a stateful data loader, and invite the community to further improve this model. Let's overcome the KV-cache bottleneck together!

> ## Artifacts :package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Artifacts 📦
```

1. [Hugging Face Bamba collection](https://huggingface.co/collections/ibm-fms/bamba-674f1388b9bbc98b413c7bab) 
2. [GitHub repo with inference, training, and tuning scripts](https://github.com/foundation-model-stack/bamba)   
3. [Data loader](https://github.com/foundation-model-stack/fms-fsdp/blob/main/fms_fsdp/utils/dataset_utils.py)  
4. [Quantization](https://github.com/foundation-model-stack/fms-model-optimizer)  
5. [Auto-pilot for cluster monitoring](https://github.com/IBM/autopilot)

> ## Motivation :star2:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Motivation 🌟
```

To foster community experimentation, we are also releasing a distributed stateless shuffle data loader and enabling Mamba2 hybrid architecture in open-source libraries like `transformers`, `TRL`, `vLLM`, and `llama.cpp`. We hope these efforts advance the adoption of Mamba architectures, alleviate KV-cache bottlenecks, and close the gap with SOTA open-source models.

### Use in transformers 🤗

To use Bamba with transformers, you can use the familiar `AutoModel` classes and the `generate` API. For more details, please follow the instructions outlined in [Bamba GitHub](https://github.com/foundation-model-stack/bamba/).

```python
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("ibm-fms/Bamba-9B")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("ibm-fms/Bamba-9B")

message = ["Mamba is a snake with following properties  "]
inputs = tokenizer(message, return_tensors='pt', return_token_type_ids=False)
response = model.generate(**inputs, max_new_tokens=64)
print(tokenizer.batch_decode(response, skip_special_tokens=True)[0])
```

> ## Evaluations :bar_chart:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Evaluations 📊
```

We divide our evaluations into three parts: 
1. Comparison with SoTA transformer models
2. Comparison with transformer models with similar token budget
3. Comparison with other Mamba variants.

> > **Evaluation setup :gear: :desktop_computer::**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Evaluation setup ⚙️ 🖥️:**
```

</details>

[HF LLM-V2](https://huggingface.co/docs/leaderboards/open_llm_leaderboard/about)\*\* :

| Model | Average | MMLU-PRO | BBH | GPQA | IFEval | MATH Lvl 5 | MuSR |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| [Bamba 9B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-fms/Bamba-9B) | 10.91 | 17.53 | 17.4 | 4.14 | 15.16 | 1.66 | 9.59 |
| [Falcon Mamba 7B](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-mamba-7b) | 14.70 | 14.33 | 19.88 | 8.17 | 31.93 | 4.0 | 9.88 |
| [Meta Llama 3.1 8B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B) | 14.27 | 25.46 | 25.16 | 8.61 | 12.55 | 5.14 | 8.72 |
| [IBM Granite v3 8B](https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite/granite-3.0-8b-base) | 21.14 | 25.83 | 28.02 | 9.06 | **44.79** | 9.82 | 9.32 |
| [Olmo2 7B](https://huggingface.co/allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B) | 13.36 | 22.79 | 21.69 | 4.92 | 16.35 | 4.38 | 10.02 |
| [Gemma2 9B](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2-9b) | 21.79 | 34.84 | 34.81 | **11.07** | 21.28 | 13.44 | 15.3 |
| [Qwen2.5 7B](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B) | **25.13** | **37.62** | **35.62** | 9.96 | 34.77 | **18.35** | **14.6** |

> ### Safety tasks

Reviewer: Not sure if the next section (comparison with transformer models with similar token budget) would follow more naturally here, given that the previous one was comparison with SoTA transformer models. If it's intended as additional detail, perhaps we could say something about more tests and comparisons being explained later, at the end of the previous section.

Author: moved it to a twistie and have removed it as a section

| NVIDIA Mamba2 Hybrid 8B\* | 58.78 | 53.6 | 47.7 | 77.69 | \-- | 42.8 | 79.65 | 38.72 | 71.27 |
| [Zamba 7B](https://huggingface.co/Zyphra/Zamba-7B-v1) | 64.36 | 57.85 | 55.38 | 61.33 | 82.27 | 46.8 | **82.21** | 49.69 | 79.32 |
| [Falcon Mamba 7B](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-mamba-7b) | **65.31** | **63.19** | **63.4** | **52.08** | 80.82 | **47.8** | **83.62** | **53.46** | **78.14** |

\* Results are taken from [NVIDIA paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.07887).

> **💡 Note:** The differences in training datasets and the number of tokens seen during training make a direct comparison of these models difficult. The key takeaway from this table is that mamba2 hybrid architecture can deliver competitive results while being nearly as efficient to train as transformer models. Furthermore, they can deliver significant improvement (theoretically up to 5x) in inference efficiency despite having full attention layers interspersed with mamba2 layers. We are continuing to pretrain the Bamba-9B model with the latest datasets and plan to release future checkpoints as the model improves.

</details>

> ## Inference efficiency :zap: :racing_car: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Inference efficiency ⚡🏎️ 
```

We use PhoneBook retrieval as the task to measure our performance. We extend the Bamba context length by 4x and 8x and compare the context-extended Bamba against three variations of Meta Llama \- LLama2, Llama3, LLama3.1, with training context lengths of 4K, 8K, and 128K. The results are plotted below.

<p align="center">
<img src="assets/bamba/phonebook.png" alt="Datamix" width="450" height="300">
</p>

We observe that the context-extended Bamba model performs exceptionally well up to a 16K context length without any tuning, outperforming the original Bamba 9B model, Llama2-7B, and llama3-8B by a large margin and obtaining comparable performance as Llama3.1-8B. At sequence length 32K, LLama3.1 achieves the best performing result. However, note that LLama3.1-8B was trained with 128K context length, which incurs a much higher pre-training cost than Bamba. As a next step, we plan to pursue various other approaches to context length extensions and study the performance on more tasks. These long context length extended models will be released as well.

> ## Summary :dart: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Summary 🎯
```

---
title: "Bamba: Inference-Efficient Hybrid Mamba2 Model"

> thumbnail: https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/bamba/bamba_thumbnail.png

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thumbnail: /blog/assets/bamba/bamba_thumbnail.png
```

The thumbnail is local to this repo :)
